. insheet using "P:\Teach\518-2004\Data\MRI2.csv"

Description of MRIdata.txt

The Cardiovascular Health Study is a government sponsored cohort study of
adults aged 65 years and older in four communities. The primary goals of the
study were to observe the incidence of cardiovascular disease
(especially heart attacks and congestive heart failure) and cerebrovascular 
disease (especially strokes) in the elderly over an 11 year period, and to 
relate the incidence of those diseases to various risk factors measured in 
the population on a regular basis. By such an observational study, greater 
insight into the natural history of chronic diseases in the elderly would be 
obtained.

In this study, over 5,000 elderly, generally healthy, adults were randomly 
selected from Medicare rolls in four communities. Agreement to participate 
was high, and thus the sample can be regarded as a fairly accurate 
representation of healthy older Americans. At the time of study enrollment, 
and on annual visits over the length of the study, the participants' data 
regarding various behavioral (e.g., smoking, alcohol consumption),
functional (e.g., ability to perform routine tasks), and clinical 
(e.g., blood pressure, laboratory tests) measures are recorded. In addition,
all serious medical events (e.g., hospitalizations, heart attacks)
are investigated and categorized based on standardized, study-wide definitions.

MRI is a relatively new imaging modality that has been found to be of great 
utility in diagnosing brain tumors, strokes, and other brain abnormalities. 
In imaging older people, however, a number of brain changes have been observed. 
The medical community is uncertain of the clinical significance of these changes. In 
particular, it has been observed that brains tend to atrophy (shrink) with age, 
that the white matter in the brain (regions of the brain that appear white
rather than gray on gross examination) tends to show up as ``brighter'' on 
MRI in older people, and that there is increasing incidence with age of
regions of the brain that look like areas of dead tissue (infarct-like lesions)
even in persons having no history of clinical stroke. It has not yet been 
established whether these changes should be viewed as part
of the normal aging process, whether these changes are merely signs of other
disease such as heart disease, or whether these changes are indicative of
separate disease processes. Thus, approximately three years into the follow-up 
of this study, participants were asked to submit to magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) of their brains. 

The file MRIdata.txt contains selected data on the subset of 735 subjects having 
the longest follow-up from this study. The data are in ASCII format with each 
line corresponding to the observations on one of the 735 participants. 
When data is missing for a particular variable, `NA' is recorded. The 
descriptions of the variables are as follows:

ptid=
Participant identification number

age=
Participant age at time of MRI (years)

male=
Indicator of whether participant is male (0= female,1=male)

weight=
Participant weight at time of MRI (pounds)

height=
Participant height at time of MRI (centimeters)

aai=
The ratio of systolic blood pressure measured in the 
participant's ankle at the time of MRI to the systolic 
blood pressure measured in the particpant'arm. Typically, 
we measure blood pressure in the arm. However, in patients 
with severe hardening of the arteries, the arteries in the 
legs may become so blocked as to restrict blood flow to the 
lower extremities. Thus, measuring the ankle blood pressure 
relative to the arm blood pressure is a marker of
extent of arterial disease: A low ankle : arm index suggests 
more severe peripheral arterial disease. A person with no 
peripheral arterial disease might be expected to have aai=1.

dsst=
A measure of cognitive function (ability to think) for the 
participant at the time of MRI. In this Digit Symbol 
Substitution Test, the participant is asked to replace each 
of a number of numerical digits with specific symbols.
The highest possible score on the test is 100.

numinf=
A count of the number of distinct regions identified on MRI 
scan that were suggestive of infarcts (dead areas of the 
brain due to oxygen deprivation).